This is Tony's
Chocolonely.
Tony's costs more than
your average Hershey's
bar. But how does it
stack up?
Tony's tastes a lot more
like, um, quote unquote,
real chocolate.
I could eat more of this
than, you know, Hershey's.
So if we look at dollar
sales, consumers love
chocolate. We spent $19
billion, which was up
about 6% in 2023 over
2022.
I would pay double price
for Tony's for sure.
It's also more ethical,
right?
The company started by
accident. The impact came
first.
With its bold and colorful
packaging, this Dutch
brand is trying to
achieve a huge mission: to
make chocolate 100% slave
free.
Today, 60% of the world's
cocoa production comes
from Ghana and the Ivory
Coast, where over 1.5
million children work on
cocoa farms.
As Tony's, we're not
interested in about just
doing it the right way
for ourselves.
We're interested in
changing the whole
industry.
Tony's Chocolonely brought
in $162 million in revenue
in fiscal year 2023.
So how did a relatively
new company from Europe
make a place for itself
in America's crowded candy
aisles?
The great thing about
being the CEO of a
chocolate company is you
get to justify eating
chocolate every day, so
you have to be careful.
I'm Douglas Lamont and
I'm the chief chocolonely
at Tony's Chocolonely.
So even though we're a
Dutch brand by origin, our
founding story actually
starts in the US.
In 2001, two US
politicians introduced the
Harkin-Engel protocol, an
international agreement
that was signed by eight
of the biggest chocolate
brands, including
Hershey, Nestle and Mars.
The goal? To end child
labor and slavery in the
chocolate industry.
Two years later, a team
of Dutch journalists,
including Teun van de
Keuken, decided to
investigate the progress
the chocolate industry had
made.
There were still huge
numbers of children
working illegally on
cocoa farms in West
Africa. They felt very
strongly that this needed
to change and needed to
be addressed.
How did they go about it?
Well, as well as
reporting the facts, they
decided that they were
going to get themselves
arrested. And Tony walked
into a police station in
the Netherlands, having
just eaten a chocolate bar
from one of the big
chocolate companies, and
insisted that he was
arrested because he was
aware that there was
illegal child labor in
this chocolate bar. And
under EU law, if you're
aware of something and
you still allow it to
happen and you
participate in that,
you're breaking the law
and can go to prison for
four years. Obviously the
policeman looked at him
rather strangely and
didn't know what to do
with this. Teune
also decided to persuade
the world's largest
chocolate makers to
change their behavior.
Willy Wonka, the Charlie
the Chocolate Factory
film, was launching in
2005.
They tried to persuade
Nestlé, who had the rights
to that bar, to introduce
a child labor free bar.
They couldn't do that and
decided that they needed
to launch a bar for
themselves.
And that is how Tony's
Chocolonely was born.
So, Tony, because Teune,
the journalist, the
international name is
obviously Tony, and
Chocolonely because they
felt that they were on a
very lonely journey to
change the industry.
But what we've also done
to raise awareness of the
inequality and the supply
chain is to make sure that
our bar does not look
like a normal bar.
And what that symbolizes
is the inequality in the
supply chain that, you
know, some people have a
big chunk, other people
get a very small chunk.
In fact, some of the
uneven shapes are actually
the West African
countries where Tony's
sources its cocoa beans.
As a Dutch brand, it
initially became very
famous and grew very
quickly to become one of
the leading chocolate bar
brands in the Netherlands.
From about 2014-15
onwards, they started to
expand internationally.
Tony's Chocolonely was
launched in the US in
2015. Today, Tony's bars
are sold nationwide at
major retailers like
Whole Foods, Target and
Walmart.
The US is clearly a really
important market for us,
not not just because of
the scale, but we you
know, we really see that
consumers increasingly are
becoming more conscious
of the types of products
they buy, the brands from
whom they buy, the reasons
behind those brands, you
know, and what we believe
at Tony's, we offer and
deliver.
And that seems to be
resonating and working.
Our most popular flavor
is our sea salt caramel
bar. It's universally
popular, closely followed
by our milk bar.
Tony's Chocolonely is
making a name for itself
in a very crowded field.
The top five manufacturers
control almost 90% of
sales. So if we look at
all the other small
players that are out
there, what we see is that
150 manufacturers
actually account or have
sales greater than $1
million in the US.
Tony's revenue grew 23% in
fiscal year 2023 to $162
million. It also received
around $22 million in
funding. While the
company has been growing
at a steady pace, it's
not making a profit yet.
We're not profitable.
We're at a break-even
position broadly as a
company, we're making
that choice to invest in
growth in the US market.
We've just launched
manufacturing capability
and capacity in Chicago
that takes upfront
investment. What we know
is essential is that we
demonstrate that we can
be a scaled, profitable
business, proving that
we're not just a chocolate
distribution charity, but
a profitable, successful
business is part of our
impact.
Besides its main chocolate
business, Tony's
Chocolonely also has a
second business called
Open Chain.
So any brand or any
private label retailer can
source cocoa from Tony's
open chain and put it into
their supply chain.
In an ideal world that
will be much bigger than
Tony's Chocolonely, we
have huge ambitions to get
to 5% of the cocoa beans
sourced through West
Africa, and that's only
possible if other partners
come on board with us and
in the end, grow much
faster than just the
beans that come from
Tony's Chocolonely.
Tony's recently partnered
with fellow socially
conscious brand Ben and
Jerry's.
They've made a commitment
to source all of their
cocoa beans for their ice
cream pieces through
Tony's open chain.
And so for a big brand
like Ben and Jerry's, with
a high commitment to
ethical sourcing, to come
on board with Tony's open
chain to look at what we
did, to compare it to
what they were, you know,
the good work they were
already doing on the
ground and decide that
our approach was the right
way forward, was a big
credit to the work that
our teams have done on
the ground.
We have 100% traceability
of our beans.
We know every farmer that
provides beans to us, and
so obviously we source
and collect those beans.
In West Africa, we
convert a number of those
beans into cocoa butter i
n West Africa.
We then transport some
beans and that cocoa
butter to either to
Europe or to the US, where
that's turned into liquid
chocolate. Combined with
all the interesting,
great flavors that we have
into bars.
Tony's Chocolonely is
trying to stop child labor
by addressing the root
issue: paying its farmers
a living wage.
What happens is those
farmers are not able to
have labor to support
them, and in the end,
their children end up
working illegally on cocoa
farms.
In 2021, Tony's was
removed from the slave
free chocolate list
because of its
relationship with
manufacturer Barry
Callebaut, which it used
to process beans into
liquid chocolate. The
company said in its
defense that its cocoa
beans are fully segregated
in Barry Callebaut's
process, and that the
partnership with the
manufacturer allows it to
scale up its production
on a global level.
In a statement to CNBC
Make It, Tony's
Chocolonely said it will
continue to source cocoa
beans from West Africa as
it works to solve the
problems there.
So what we believe in is
radical transparency.
So we report on every
single case of child labor
that we find in order to
address it.
And it's only by being
transparent about the
problem and then actively
addressing it that you
deal with the systemic
issues.
In fiscal year 2023, the
company reported that it
had found around 1,000
incidents of child labor
in its supply chain.
Chocolate consumption in
the US actually dipped 6%
in 2023, but Americans
were still spending more
than ever on it.
Well, part of the reason
why we're seeing a decline
in consumption is that
most of us, even though we
love chocolate, are still
being faced with higher
prices. In 2023,
chocolate prices actually
increased 12%, which is a
significant increase.
So faced with those
higher prices, consumers
once again are deciding,
do I need this or do I
want this?
Besides the chocolate
bars, Tony's Chocolonely
has been introducing new
products to the market
like bite-sized
chocolates and seasonal
products.
We've obviously got lots
of seasonal products,
including, you know, our
advent calendars.
Behind one of the doors,
we don't have a chocolate.
Another great way to tell
the story about the
inequality and the supply
chain. So when you don't
get a chocolate in your
advent calendar, you want
to understand why.
So where are the original
founders today?
They're still
shareholders, and they
still regularly pop in
and see us and see the
progress that we're
making as a brand.
We're really excited
about where the brand is
going and where Tony's
open chain is going,
because we really feel
that industry change is
now possible. We're
proving that we can do
this at scale.
And also, with
legislation being
tightened up around
deforestation and
traceability, we feel
like all the right things
are coming into place to
drive wider industry
change. We're not going
to rest until we deliver
on our mission to end
exploitation in the cocoa
industry.